## What is vi?

vi (Visual Editor) is one of the oldest and most commonly available text editors in Linux/Unix.

It has two main modes:

Command mode – for giving commands (move, delete, copy, save, quit, etc.).

By default, vi starts in command mode.

## Start vi

vi filename.txt

If filename.txt exists → it opens the file.

If not → it creates a new file.

### Switching Modes

Press i → Switch to insert mode (start typing text).

Press Esc → Go back to command mode.

### Basic Operations in vi

### 1. Insert text

Press i → type text → press Esc when done.

Press A → end of the line in insert mode

Press a → insert mode and cursor position will change another letter.

Press I → Insert mode and will move to starting line

Press O → insert line above cursor

Press o → insert line below cursor

### 2. Save & quit

:w → save (write) file.

:q → quit (only if no unsaved changes).

:wq → save and quit.

:q! → quit without saving.

### 3. Deleting text
x → delete a single character.

dd → delete entire line.

ndd → delete n lines (e.g., 3dd deletes 3 lines).

### 4. Copy & paste

yy → copy (yank) a line.

nyy → copy n lines.

p → paste below cursor.

P → paste above cursor.

### 5. Search & replace

/word → search forward for “word”.

?word → search backward.

:s/old/new/ → replace first “old” with “new” in the current line.

:s/old/new/g → replace all occurrences in current line.

:%s/old/new/g → replace all in whole file.

### Quick Workflow Example

## 1. Open file:
vi notes.txt

## 2. Press i and type:
This is my first file in vi editor.
Learning Linux is fun!

## 3. Press Esc.
Type :wq → press Enter (saves & quits).

## Summary:

vi has command mode (default) and insert mode (i).

:wq = save & quit, :q! = quit without saving.

You can navigate, delete, copy, paste, search, replace inside vi


### 6. Navigation (command mode)

h → move left

l → move right

k → move up

j → move down

0 (zero) → move to beginning of line

$ → move to end of line

gg → go to beginning of file

G → go to end of file

w → word by word cursor will move forward [ Ex: 6w; 4w it will move four words if you give 4w]

b → word by word cursor will move backward [ ex: i want to move four words back then give 4b]

u → undo

ctrl+r → redo

:se nu → to get line numbers

:se nonu → to remove line numbers

:X  → encrypt file using password

:X  → remove password from the file 




